## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Language constantly evolves as the meaning we ascribe to words changes over time.
Similarly, scientific fields of inquiry also change as researchers devise and test new hypotheses and applications.
As most findings are communicated through writing, it presents a prime opportunity to examine how scientific terms in the literature change over time.
These changes are referred to as semantic shifts and have been examined mainly outside the scientific domain.
To fill this gap, we sought to analyze these shifts within two open-access biomedical corpora, PubMed Central open access corpus (PMCOA), and preprints from bioRxiv/medRxiv.
We used a natural language processing technique, Word2Vec, to represent words as dense vectors based on their corresponding neighbors.
Multiple Word2Vec models cannot be directly compared without a correction step. 
Otherwise, distances will appear significantly more significant than expected.
We used Orthogonal Procrustes to correct this issue.
However, despite this correction, these models are still subject to high variation due to latent factors such as document availability and token count.
We used an integrated-model approach that takes the ratio of between-year variation (inter) and within-year variation (intra) to adjust these latent variability issues.
Using our approach, we detected 41,281 potential change points via PMCOA and over 2266 changepoints via bioRxiv/medRxiv.
We found tokens previously expected to have a changepoint such as 'cas9', 'pandemic', and 'sars' out of our candidate list.
Lastly, we constructed a web application (https://greenelab.github.io/word-lapse/) that enables closer examination of individual tokens as they change over time.