# Introduction

The human language is constantly evolving as words change their meaning over time. 
For example, the word nice meant foolish or innocent back in the 15th-17th century; then, it underwent a positive shift toward meaning "pleasant or delightful"[@doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199384655.013.323]. 
These shifts occur for many reasons, such as writers using new metaphors or substituting words for others with similar meanings (metonymy) [@doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199384655.013.323]. 
Studying these shifts is essential as they enable a better understanding of the human language and its adaptations.

Analogous to the human language, science is rapidly evolving as researchers devise new hypotheses and applications.
For example, a notable discovery would be the repurposing of the CRISPR-Cas9 system.
This immunological system was first used in microbes to defend against invading viruses.
Later around 2012, scientists repurposed this system to become a popular genome-editing tool [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.041].
These types of discoveries within science are often shared via written communication [@doi:10.1021/ci00050a001], which consists of reporting results in the form of published papers [@doi:10.1073/pnas.98.2.381] and preprints [@doi:10.1101/833400; @doi:10.1126/science.aay2933].
This communication medium provides an effective way of discovering longitudinal trends in scientific research as it allows for computational linguistic techniques to be applied.

Analyzing longitudinal changes in text consists of a computational linguistic task called semantic shift detection.
This task involves generating a time series sequence and then detecting the presence of abnormalities within the constructed sequence.
Typically, these time series are generated for individual words by training a unique model on text binned by a selected time period [@arxiv:1605.09096; @arxiv:1606.0282; @doi:10.18653/v1/N18-1044].
Following time series generation, the next step is to align models to enable comparison [@arxiv:1411.3315].
A common technique for alignment is Orthogonal Procrustes [@doi:10.1007/BF02289451], but other ways to perform alignment have been used [@arxiv:1702.08359; @arxiv:1703.00607].
The last step is to detect abnormalities, which is a task referred to as changepoint detection.
This task is accomplished through statistical techniques such as bayesian changepoint detection [@arxiv:0710.3742] or cumulative sum analysis (CUSUM) [@gustafsson].
After detection, the output is a listing of words that are candidates for further investigation.

This task of semantic shift detection has had a significant focus on areas outside of the biomedical research domain. 
Notable examples are previous work that discovered armed conflict events via newspaper analysis [@doi:10.18653/v1/W17-2705; @arxiv:1711.05603;@doi:10.1017/S0003055417000570], developing new statistical laws for semantic changes [@arxiv:1605.09096; @arxiv:1606.0282], and using Twitter [@arxiv:1411.3315] to discover word usage changes over time.
Also, previous work has shown how Information Retrieval research topics have changed over time [@doi:10.1007/s11192-018-2843-2].
Regarding biomedical research, previous work has examined how titles for disease-related research papers changed over time [@doi:10.1142/9789811232701_0011], while other work examined how COVID-19 affected posts on Twitter [@arxiv:2102.07836].
Despite these discoveries, there has yet to be work done that utilizes biomedical papers on a broad scale to uncover semantic shifts through time.

This paper plans to uncover semantic shifts through time by analyzing the biomedical literature.
We use published papers and preprints as input to our data analysis pipeline.
We use a novel approach that contains multiple distributional models for each time period to account for an ongoing problem of word2vec model instability.
Following training, we use these models to detect semantic changes for each individual token and provide the community with a list of potential changepoints that future work can utilize.
Lastly, we created a website that encapsulates this work to provide users with a way to examine biomedical terms and their longitudinal trends.


