# Discussion and Conclusion

Language is rapidly evolving, and the usage of words changes over time.
These sorts of changes result in words assimilating new meanings or associations.
A modest amount of work has studied these trends using biomedical text; however, there has yet to be a study that used biomedical text as a whole.
We sought to fill this gap by implementing an analysis that observes how the usage of tokens changes over time using all open-access biomedical corpora from Pubmed (PMCOA) and bioRxiv/MedRxiv.

We confirmed a common notion that multiple word2vec models cannot be compared without a correction step.
We chose Orthogonal Procrustes as our correction method and validated that this step enabled direct comparison of tokens.
Despite our correction efforts, model variation remained due to latent differences corpora such as document availability and token count for each year.
We constructed a novel statistic that took the ratio of the average inter-year distance over the sum of the intra-year distances for the respective years being compared.
Our ratio approach confirmed that models trained on large corpora tend to stabilize more than models trained on small corpora, reinforcing previous findings [@doi:10.1162/tacl_a_00008; @doi:10.48550/arXiv.1804.09692].

Using our ratio of variation approach, we used the CUSUM algorithm to detect changepoint events.
We detected over 41,000 different changepoints, and among our list tokens such as 'cas9', 'pandemic', and 'sars'  were present.
We expected these tokens to appear as changepoints given that they were prominently known to have undergone a change within the field [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.041; @doi:10.1038/s41591-021-01654-6; @doi:10.1046/j.1440-1843.2003.00517.x; @doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.105924; @doi:10.1038/s41564-020-0695-z].
Furthermore, we noticed many changepoints that overlapped between PMCOA and preprints were related to COVID-19.
However, many of our detected changepoints are subject to further investigation due to the reliance on manual curation and expert knowledge to confirm validation.
An extension to this work would be the development of automatic approaches to determine the validity of a changepoint.
Furthermore, another extension would be to apply a similar approach to other corpora such as the arXiv [@doi:10.1108/14666180010345564] or psyArXiv [@doi:10.5260/chara.23.2.38] repositories.
Lastly, we constructed a website to enable closer examination of individual tokens as they change through time.